feat: AEP 4: ArmoniK Load Balancer (#43)
aneoconsulting/ArmoniK.Community: AEP/aep-00004.md

|                   |ArmoniK Enhancement Proposal|
---:                |:---
**AEP**             | 4
**Title**           | ArmoniK Load Balancer
**Author**          | Florian Lemaitre <<flemaitre@aneo.fr>>
**Status**          | Draft
**Type**            | Standard
**Creation Date**   | 2024-04-12

# Abstract

This AEP proposes an ArmoniK native Load Balancer, which can be used to scale ArmoniK clusters.

# Motivation

ArmoniK is built around a centralized database, queue and object storage, and that makes it hard to scale. While it is fairly easy to have a scalable (distributed) object, it is much more complex to setup a scalable database or queue.

# Rationale

A simple alternative is to have multiple isolated ArmoniK clusters, with their own database, queue, and object storage. To make such a design transparent and easy to work with, an ArmoniK Load Balancer would be needed.

Such a Load Balancer would understand the ArmoniK concepts and forwards user requests based on ArmoniK data like the session ID.

# Specification

## solution overview

An ArmoniK Load Balancer would be an external service that would serve ArmoniK API in gRPC and redirect them to a cluster.

> Upon Session creation, a single cluster is assigned to the session, chosen by the implementation. Afterwards, all requests targeting the session will be redirected to its assigned cluster.

Reviewer: Shouldn't the user be able to specify the cluster targeted ?
How does this cope with the choice of partitions ?

Reviewer 2: Meta-control plane could look into task options or session options to get indications to make the choice

Author: @wkirschenmann This is explained later on, with the Database implementation when I talk about smart decisions. I could add a sentence there to emphasize the possibility to choose according to the task options.

Regarding the partitions, if the load balancer cannot find a cluster with all your partitions constraints, it will raise an error as explained in the partition section. Forcing a cluster using metadata does not change that, and just reduce the number of clusters considered for selection.

Reviewer 3: If I understant it correctly, that means that tasks from a session which start on prem cannot be done on the cloud?

Author: Yes, that's what is explained.

The Load Balancer could scale to many servers without issues, especially if they do not need a database.

### Database-less

The simplest design would be to compute deterministcally the cluster where to send the session by computing a hash of the session ID.
While this would enable infinite scaling in theory, it comes with a group of issues not that easy to solve.

When the session is created, the cluster must be chosen before the session ID is known. A solution to this problem would be to add an RPC to create a session with a specific session ID and let the Load Balancer generate this ID before choosing a cluster.

Some RPCs do not have the session ID in the request message which would make it hard to get the right cluster. A possible aolution to this is to request the data on all clusters, and cache which result is bound to which session. When the client request the creation of a result, the link between the result and its session could also be recorded in this cache. Apart from Load Balancer booting, this would limit the number of time where the load balancer need to request all clusters. Another solution would be to add the session ID to all requests in the API.

> If the number of clusters change over time, how one could compute to which cluster is bound a session ID is unclear. Moving sessions between clusters to rebalance the distributed hash table does not seem possible. Of course, this problem does not exist if the clusters are static.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the number of clusters change over time, how one could compute to which cluster is bound to which session ID is unclear. Moving sessions between clusters to rebalance the distributed hash table does not seem possible. Of course, this problem does not exist if the clusters are static.
```

### with database

To work around the issues related to absence of a database, we can add a database to the load balancers to record the links between the sessions and the clusters. In particular, there is no need to know the session ID beforehand when creating the session.

Having a database to store the link between sessions and clusters also enable smart decisions about which cluster to choose for new sessions. For instance, the Load Balancer could choose the cluster with the least load. It could even allow the user to choose the cluster themselves using some request metadata.

It would also enable dynamic clusters as no rebalancing of the clusters would be needed.

> The downside to the database approach is the loss of the stateless property of the Load Balancer. Because the LB is baked by a database, it will also be limited in scaling by said database.

Reviewer: Using a database does not prevent having a local cache strategy to reduce the number of calls to the DB.
The question of the APIs that do not require a session ID remains.

Author: I can add a complementary information about caching.
I will most likely highlight the limitation about Session-less RPC that still exist for the database solution.

> The downside to the database approach is the loss of the stateless property of the Load Balancer. Because the LB is baked by a database, it will also be limited in scaling by said database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The downside to the database approach is the loss of the stateless property of the Load Balancer. Because the LB is backed by a database, it will also be limited in scaling by said database.
```

## Implementation

The implementation of such a Load Balancer would consist in a gRPC server and client. The server would take ArmoniK requests from the user, and forward them to the right cluster using ArmoniK API. It would forward the response back to the user.

In particular, it is transparent from both ends, client and control plane.

> No specific API is required.

Reviewer: Except to guide the choice of the cluster.

Author: This is optional, and can be a task options, thus, can be done without API change.

## Remarks

### On-demand clusters

An extension of the Load Balancer could be to provision clusters on-the-fly. When a session is created, the Load Balancer could deploy a fresh cluster that will be destroyed when the session is deleted.

> The design of such a solution is more complex and should be considered later on.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The design of such a solution is more complex and will eventually be considered in a futur AEP.
```

### Authentication

There are many ways to handle the authentication in the presence of load balancing.
Whatever solution is chosen, the TLS connexion must be terminated at the load balancer to let it interpret the queries.

One possibility would be to perform authentication and authorization at the Load Balancer level, and forward the request to the cluster only if the user is permitted to do the action.
Authentication would be disabled on the clusters, or at least would allow the load balancer to perform any action.
This would greatly complexify the Load Balancer itself.

> Next possibility would be to let the load balancer impersonate users to the cluster using the standard impersonification faeture of the authentication system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next possibility would be to let the load balancer impersonate users to the cluster using the standard impersonification feature of the authentication system.
```

> This would force te load balancer to have a dedicated user on the clusters with the permission to impersonnate any user.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This would force the load balancer to have a dedicated user on the clusters with the permission to impersonnate any user.
```

As it is currently not possible to chain impersonifications, it would also forbid end-users to impersonate themselves, even if they have the permission to do it.

> Last possibility would be make the load balancer forward the identity headers to the clusters, in the same way the nginx ingress transmit the identity to the control plane currently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Last possibility would be to make the load balancer forward the identity headers to the clusters, in the same way the nginx ingress transmit the identity to the control plane currently.
```

> Extra configuration at the cluster ingress would be required to allow the load balacner to set those sensitive headers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Extra configuration at the cluster ingress would be required to allow the load balancer to set those sensitive headers.
```

As an example, consider a cluster A with partitions p1 and p2, and a cluster B with partitions p2 and p3.
If a session need to target p2, it can go on either A or B.
If a session targets p1 and p2, it can only go on A.
If a session targets p3, it can only go on B.
If a session targets p1 and p3, it cannot go anywhere, and the load balancer raises an error.
If a session targets p4, the load balancer raises an error.

### Monitoring

The presence of load balancers would make the monitoring harder because of the listing accross clusters.

The recommended way would be to enforce listing tasks and results on sessions, and adapt the GUI to match that requirement.
To have a global overview, it would be necessary to add some session-wide statistics like the number of tasks completed and in error to enable the view at the session level, without the need to query all the clusters.
The aggregation could be performed at regular interval on all opened sessions to reduce the quantity of sessions to query, as a closed session cannot have more tasks added.

### Cluster field

> An alternative to the session id field being used to load balance the request, we could add a cluster field to all the rpc, and use that to load balance the requests.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An alternative to the session id field being used to load balance the reques will be to add a cluster field to all the rpc which can be use to load balance the requests.
```

It could also be use for the monitoring instead of imposing a filter on the session.

> This change would be more intrusive API-wise.

Reviewer: [gRPC documentation](https://grpc.io/blog/grpc-load-balancing/#l3l4-transport-vs-l7-application) suggests using cookies

Author: This is not about the connection, it is about the metadata of our sessions (and results/tasks).
Also, they say "cookies or similar".
And mandating the presence of a cookie is also a breaking change API wise, just not recorded in the proto definition.

Upon Session creation, a single cluster is assigned to the session, chosen by the implementation.
Afterward, all requests targeting the session will be redirected to their assigned cluster.
The assigned cluster cannot be changed after the session has been created.
This binding enables to easily keep track of the tasks and data within a session, even if more tasks and data are created from the workers.

No additional API is required, and few adjustments are required infrastructure-wise.
The ingress in front of the actual cluster should accept authentication headers from the Load Balancer itself, or the Load Balancer is an authenticated user of the cluster that is able to impersonate any user of the cluster.

The Load Balancer could scale to many servers without issues.

## Implementation

The implementation of such a Load Balancer would consist in a gRPC server and client.
The server would take ArmoniK requests from the user, and forward them to the right cluster using ArmoniK API.
It would forward the response back to the user.

In particular, it is transparent from both ends, client and control plane.
No specific API is required.

> The choice of a cluster can be random, or follow some business rules like selecting the cluster with the less load, the cheapest one, or the cluster with the fastest hardware.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The choice of a cluster can be random, or follow some business rules like selecting the cluster with the least load, the cheapest one, or the cluster with the fastest hardware.
```

It could also be possible to select a specific cluster when creating the session using the default `TaskOptions` of the session and a known field if required.

### Caching and cluster discovery

When a new session is created, the link between the session ID and the cluster is recorded either in a database or in a cache (possibly within the process itself).

> This enable the Load Balancer to directly know to which cluster to redirect future requests for this session.

Author: it is "redirect to" no "redirect towards" so I would keep it.

> There is no consideration of cache coherency between Load Balancers or cache expiration as the binding to a cluster cannot change ever.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There is no consideration of cache coherency between Load Balancers or cache expiration as the binding to a cluster can never change.
```

For the RPCs that do not have the session ID in their requests (like `GetTaskRequest`), a discovery among the clusters is required.

> Upon such request, the Load Balancer would forward the request to all clusters, and return only the response of the cluster containing the requested task or result.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Upon such request, the Load Balancer would forward the request to all clusters, and return only the cluster response containing the task or result requested.
```

The link between the task/result and the cluster can also be cached to reduce the number of discoveries.

> To reduce even further the number of discoveries, the link between tasks/results and clusters can also be cached upon task/result creation when the cluster actually returns the new ID to the Load Balancer.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To reduce even further the number of discoveries, the link between tasks/results and clusters can be cached upon task/result creation when the cluster actually returns the new ID to the Load Balancer.
```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To further reduce the number of discoveries, the link between tasks/results and clusters can be cached upon task/result creation when the cluster actually returns the new ID to the Load Balancer.
```

And by adding the session ID to all the RPC, we would be able to remove all discoveries during normal execution, even when workers create new tasks and results.

This principle of cluster discovery can also be used to handle Load Balancer restarts, and make them stateless.

> On startup, the cache will be empty, and all requests would trigger a discovery, even if the session ID is included in the request.

Reviewer 4: No the cache is within the process itself, so the cache is indeed "empty" and not "emptied"

Using a database instead of (or in addition to) a cache would avoid too many discoveries on startups, but could limit the scaling to what the database can handle.

> It would be possible to enable communications between Load-Balancers in order to reduce the number of discoveries altogether, at the price of a much more complicated Load Balancer.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It could be possible to enable communications between Load-Balancers in order to reduce the number of discoveries altogether, at the price of a much more complex Load Balancer.
```

### Authentication

> There are many ways to handle the authentication in the presence of load balancing.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There are many ways to handle authentication in the presence of load balancing.
```

This would greatly complexify the Load Balancer itself.

Another possibility would be to let the Load Balancer impersonate users to the cluster using the standard impersonate feature of the authentication system.
This would force the Load Balancer to have a dedicated user on the clusters with the permission to impersonate any user.
As it is currently not possible to chain impersonates, it would also forbid end-users to impersonate themselves, even if they have the permission to do it.

Last possibility would be to make the Load Balancer forward the identity headers to the clusters, in the same way the nginx ingress transmits the identity to the control plane currently.
Extra configuration at the cluster ingress would be required to allow the Load Balancer to set those sensitive headers.
This last solution is the preferred one as it is simple to implement, secure, and featureful.

### Partitions

As a single session cannot span multiple clusters, all the partitions requested by the session must exist on the target cluster.
The Load Balancer would be able to select a cluster that supports all the partitions requested, if any.

> It should avoid selecting a cluster that does not support a partition, and if no cluster supports all the partitions, the Load Balancer would raise an error.

Reviewer 4: We'll need a partition discovery when we add dynamic partitioning

As an example, consider a cluster A with partitions p1 and p2, and a cluster B with partitions p2 and p3.
If a session needs to target p2, it can go on either A or B.
If a session targets p1 and p2, it can only go on A.
If a session targets p3, it can only go on B.
If a session targets p1 and p3, it cannot go anywhere, and the Load Balancer raises an error.
If a session targets p4, the Load Balancer raises an error.

### Cluster health

> With a static mapping between sessions and clusters (eg: without a database), if the chosen cluster is not reachable at the time the cluster is chosen, an error is raised.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
With a static mapping between sessions and clusters (eg: without a database), if the chosen cluster is not reachable when assigning a session, an error is raised.
```

Author: The explanation is outdated

> There is no internal retry for static mappings.

Reviewer 4: What happens if multiple clusters could host that session ? If cluster A or B can host the session, would we try on A, and if it fails, try on B ?

If the mapping is dynamic (eg: with a database), the Load Balancer can retry to create the session on another cluster or raise an error if no cluster is available.

Once a session is bound to a cluster, all requests for this session will raise an error if the cluster becomes unreachable.
For monitoring requests that span multiple clusters (if allowed), it is not clear how to indicate that one of the clusters is unresponsive, while still returning the response from other clusters.

> The simplest solution would be to silently ignore cluster failures and return the response from all the responsive clusters without any indication of cluster failure.

Author: La phrase d'avant:

> For monitoring requests that span multiple clusters (if allowed), it is not clear how to indicate that one of the clusters is unresponsive, while still returning the response from other clusters.

### Monitoring

The presence of Load Balancers would make the monitoring harder because of the listing across clusters.

The recommended way would be to enforce listing tasks and results on sessions and adapt the GUI to match that requirement.
To have a global overview, it would be necessary to add some session-wide statistics like the number of tasks completed and in error to enable the view at the session level, without the need to query all the clusters.
The aggregation could be performed at regular interval on all opened sessions to reduce the number of sessions to query, as a closed session cannot have more tasks added.

### Dynamic clusters

> The design impose no constraint on the addition of new clusters during operation.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The design imposes no constraint on the addition of new clusters during operation.
```

It would be a simple matter of allowing a new cluster to be chosen at session creation.

The removal of a cluster is trickier.

> This would be possible only if all the sessions of the cluster are closed to avoid computation loss.

Reviewer 4: I wouldn't think so, as it may only be a transient failure

> This would be possible only if all the sessions of the cluster are closed to avoid computation loss.

Author: Dynamic clusters is not about failures. The explanation about cluster failures is in "Cluster Health" section.

If the monitoring of removed clusters is required, a dedicated database would be needed to store all the metadata of the removed clusters.
When a RPC targets a removed cluster, this backup database could be requested instead.

## Further considerations

### Global monitoring

Imposing to have a monitoring by session is simple enough, but is not really useful.
A better approach would be to enable the monitoring spanning all clusters, and allow the listing of the tasks from all clusters.

The main issue for that is the paginated listing of tasks or results.
Indeed, it is not possible to know what pages of which cluster is required to get the n-th page of the global view.

> A way would be to introduce gRPC streaming for listing.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A method to resolve this point would be the introduction of a gRPC stream for listing.
```

> A way would be to introduce gRPC streaming for listing.

Author: The explanation is outdated

> With that, it would be possible for the Load Balancer to request all the clusters and merge their stream using the specified sort.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It would then be possible for the Load Balancer to request all the clusters and merge their streams using the specified sort.
```

It is not clear how this could be integrated into the Web GUI where the pages are mandatory for UX purposes.
Either the GUI could materialize the whole stream when getting the pages, or a dedicated service could perform this materialization task.

> The latter approach would be more complex especially to avoid system overloads in the presence of many client, but we would entirely compatible with the current API.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The latter approach would be more complex, especially to avoid system overloads in the presence of many clients, but would be entirely compatible with the current API.
```

### On-demand clusters

An extension of the Load Balancer could be to provision clusters on the fly.
When a session is created, the Load Balancer could deploy a fresh cluster that will be destroyed when the session is deleted.

The design of such a solution is more complex and could be considered later on.

### Cluster field

An alternative to the session ID field being used to load balance the request would be to add a cluster field to all the rpc which can be used to load balance the requests.
It could also be used for monitoring instead of imposing a filter on the session.

This change would be more intrusive API-wise.

# Rejected idea

## Deterministic binding

> The first idea we had for a stateless Load Balancer was to avoid discovery altogether and have a deterministic binding between session and cluster.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The first idea for a stateless Load Balancer was to avoid discovery altogether and have a deterministic binding between session and cluster.
```

The session ID would have been hashed to select which cluster it goes to, in a similar way to a (distributed) hash table.
With such a design, the Load Balancer would know without any state to which cluster a session is bound.

> There is mainly four problems with such an approach.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There are mainly four problems with such an approach.
```

# AEP 4: ArmoniK Load Balancer

|                   |ArmoniK Enhancement Proposal|
---:                |:---
**AEP**             | 4
**Title**           | ArmoniK Load Balancer
**Author**          | Florian Lemaitre <<flemaitre@aneo.fr>>
**Status**          | Draft
**Type**            | Standard
**Creation Date**   | 2024-04-12

# Abstract

> This AEP proposes an Armonik native Load Balancer, which can be used to scale ArmoniK clusters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This AEP proposes an ArmoniK native Load Balancer, which can be used to scale ArmoniK clusters.
```

# Motivation

ArmoniK using a single database, queue and object storage, it is hard to make it scale. Distributed Object Storage is simple, but distributed database and queue are much more complex to setup.

# Rationale

> A simple alternative is to have multiple isolated clusters, with their own database, queue, and object storage. To make such a design transparent and easy to work with, an ArmoniK Load Balancer would be needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A simple alternative is to have multiple isolated ArmoniK clusters, with their own database, queue, and object storage. To make such a design transparent and easy to work with, an ArmoniK Load Balancer would be needed.
```
